Do you grok the significance of a Ringworld? Can you envision a dragon rider
with eyes of amber? If these create images that intrigue you, tune in to the
science fiction radio show, where you'll hear authors describe how they create
their worlds of fantasy and the future.
Have you ever wondered why the science fiction section is the largest section in
the bookstore? Come explore the myriad worlds of science fiction and fantasy
with the science fiction radio show, where you'll discover that time travel may
really be possible.
Are you puzzled by the phrase, beam me up, Scotty? Are you confused because your
children have seen Star Wars 20 times and are going to see it again? Learn more
about the most widely read fiction on the bookshelves today on the science
fiction radio show.
The biggest money-making movie of all time is a science fiction movie. The
biggest section in the bookstore is the science fiction section. Discover more
about this phenomenon on the science fiction radio show.
Come explore the myriad worlds of science fiction and fantasy with the science
fiction radio show, where you'll discover that time travel may really be
possible.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Crews. Norman Spinrad has strong opinions about
science fiction and its place in today's world. As a noted author who helped
bring the science fiction new wave to this country, and as two-time president of
the Science Fiction Writers of America, Spinrad's ideas should be heard. One
thing he feels strongly about is that science fiction has not been treated
fairly by book reviewers. As a category, you know, it is treated very unfairly
and very cavalierly by the powers that be, which is mainly the New York Times
Book Review and the New York Review of Books and the so-called New York Literary
Establishment, which really does have a very heavy effect on the way books are
published. These people, for instance, came down on the American Book Awards,
succeeded in getting science fiction knocked out of the American Book Awards. A
real small clique of people in New York City who felt that it was really bad to
have these awards given to things like science fiction, that it was bad to take
it away from a small jury which they could control and have thousands of people
voting for. A very elitist, social fascist bunch of people who I have absolutely
no use for. And I'm sure they have no use for me. As president of the Science
Fiction Writers of America, Spinrad has worked for some changes in the field.
One thing that I'm already halfway through getting done is to internationalize.
It's to have an overseas region with an overseas director on our board of
directors. Because science fiction writing and publishing really is an
international community. American writers sell their work all over the world.
English writers sell their work here. Foreign language writers have different
problems. And we're all dealing with the same publishers. It certainly is an
international literature and it's a spirit of the future and the spirit of
internationalism and so forth. I felt it should be an international
organization. That's one thing. The other thing that I want to do and halfway to
doing is upgrading the Nebula Awards. We have moved it out of the Warwick Hotel.
We're moving it into a much bigger room in the world often, trying to make it
into a more significant event than it has been. Again, orienting it towards the
world at large rather than towards the little in-group. Spinrad has always been
concerned with the image science fiction has with the general public. He thinks
general readers should be made more aware of science fiction's unique
possibilities and its genuine value. We asked him if science fiction movies have
a positive or negative influence on the public's image of the field. I don't
know. I don't think they... Not really. I mean, the image of science fiction in
that respect has been very bad anyway. I don't think the movies really add to
the image, but I don't think they detract from it either. If there are some
better, more sophisticated movies, they might help. As it is, it's just kind of
neutral publicity, people more aware that it exists. I think it's positive and
will prove to be positive in the long range because a lot of people are being
introduced to the imagery of science fiction with which they were unfamiliar
through these movies. And if you look at the evolution in the movies, you find
that in the earlier science fiction movies, if you're going into space or
whatever it is, you had to spend like half an hour setting the thing. This is a
spaceship. It takes off on the Earth. People float around it. You have to
familiarize the audience with all this unfamiliar imagery. Now they can just
start a movie, bang, right off in a galaxy far away. Boom. Here's a spaceship in
the Stromo. Pow. Now, you know, that it was the first half hour of the
conventional old-time science fiction movie is gone because people are now
familiar with this imagery. And I think these movies have brought a lot of new
people into familiarity with these images. They made these images part of the
popular culture. These movies have been mainly aimed at kids and adolescents.
Ten years from now, assuming that these people will ever read anything, they
will be ready to read science fiction of a more serious kind, assuming they're
ready to read literature of a more serious kind at all, because they'll be
familiar with the material, familiar with the literature. It won't seem strange
and weird to them because they will have grown up with it. That's why I think
magazines, even magazines like Starlog, in that sense, will have a long-term
positive impact. More with Norman Spinrad on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with
us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews. And Daryl Lane. Norman Spinrad's best-known novel may be Bug
Jack Barron, a book which has stirred controversy in both England and America.
It was published in this country in 1969, and it's a different sort of science
fiction novel. It's a good example of new-wave science fiction. Character and
style are important, and it deals with social issues such as racism, the
establishment, drugs, the power of the media, and radical protests. There is
also a good deal of sex and violence in the book, and the language is highly
colored. But Spinrad thinks the plot of the book conforms to traditional science
fiction formulas. Actually, what I was trying to do in a way, the book has a
very traditional plot. As far as I was concerned, you know, it has a positive
hero, it has a negative villain. The hero wins, the villain loses. All that
stuff that is considered, you know, the traditional way of plotting a book. And
yet it's written in a different kind of way. It kind of takes that superficial
kind of plot and treats it in a realistic manner. The protagonist, Jack Barron,
is a powerfully influential television star who has a talk show watched by 100
million people. He uses the show as a battlefield to oppose corrupt elements of
society. Spinrad comments on Barron's use of power. The book is about power.
It's about power itself is neutral as far as I'm concerned. It's what people do
with it that counts. Barron is a guy who likes power and keeps referring to it
as a drug. And knows that he can become addicted to it. And for that reason, has
decided to stay away from it. Then he gets drawn back into playing with power
because he comes to the conclusion that it's better for somebody who feels that
way about power to be wielding it than people who don't have any self
-consciousness about the dangers of wielding power. So in that sense, it's a
comment on the power of the media, but it's also a comment on the morality of
power, on the paradox of power, which is that if you leave power to be wielded
to be wielded by people who do not see the dangers, the personal dangers, the
psychological dangers of being involved with it, then you end up with people
like Benedict Howitz, Ronald Reagan, and Richard Nixon, who do not have self
-consciousness about the personal dangers, the moral dangers of chasing after
power. Whereas somebody like Barron, who is certainly an imperfect person, as
all people are, at least his saving grace, if he has one, is that he is well
aware of the personal dangers of being involved in a quest for power. When
Spinrad tried to get the novel published in this country, he was unsuccessful,
so he tried in Britain. But there was an outcry in Parliament against the book.
He relates the story for us. That novel had a lot of trouble. It was written
under contract to Doubleday, who then rejected it. You know, you have to
remember the political climate of the era. They didn't reject it. They said,
we'll publish it if you cut out all the sex, all the swear words, and all the
politics, which was, you know, the whole book. So it took a long time to resell
that book here. In the meantime, I took it to Milford, to a Milford conference,
and Mike Moorcock was there, and he read it, and he locked it, and he serialized
it in New World, so his first publication was actually in England, in the
magazine. Now, halfway through the serialization, I forget exactly which part,
part three, part four, W. H. Smith, which was the biggest distributor, still is
the biggest distributor in England, refused to distribute the magazine because
of the book in it. Now, at that time, New World had an Arts Council grant. The
Arts Council was an organ of the British government. Now, the Arts Council
supported the magazine against Smith publicly, and so the flap in Parliament
arose when certain right-wing members of Parliament were aghast that an organ of
the British government, the Arts Council, was defending this kind of stuff, and
that's how it became a parliamentary issue. Bug Jack Barron is being made into a
movie, with a screenplay by Harlan Ellison and direction by radical filmmaker
Costa Gavras. It should be interesting. More with Norman Spinrad next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Crews. Norman Spinrad's 1979 science fiction novel,
A World Between, signaled a change in his fiction. Spinrad's early work usually
contained either subtle or overt criticism of various aspects of society. Bug
Jack Baron, The Men in the Jungle, and Agent of Chaos are good examples of this
type. A World Between is also a socially oriented novel, but there's a different
element in it. Spinrad explains. I would say in general that up until, I guess,
A World Between, really, a lot of my stuff was kind of critical fiction,
critical of this, critical of existing societies, critical of various things
that were going on. A World Between is meant as a utopian novel, really, in any
kind of way. And it's a prescriptive kind of book. It's more of a, instead of
presenting critical images of other things, the idea is to create a more
positive image of a more positive kind of future. I think if you spend enough
time criticizing what exists, at some point you have some kind of moral
obligation to present something more positive and replace what you find
negative.
The setting for the novel is a fit one for a utopia. It takes place on the
planet Pacifica, a beautiful world of blue ocean and lush green islands that's
been colonized by humans. Inhabitants of Pacifica live private lives in their
isolated islands. There are no large urban centers to cause pollution,
overpopulation, or poverty. Even though they are physically isolated, the
Pacificans remain in close electronic contact with one another. They govern
themselves, in fact, with a tight media web that allows them to vote immediately
on any issue of importance. But into this idyllic world comes two opposed
political forces from Earth, bent on the ideological conquest of Pacifica. One
force is the Institute for Transcendental Science, a powerful organization whose
goal is galactic unity under their control. They are extreme, and Spinrad says
they have two basic flaws. One is the unexamined, subtle male chauvinist bias to
their culture. And the other one is the ultimate conviction that what they are
doing is the absolute most important thing in the universe, and that therefore
they are morally entitled to run over other people's cultures and desires.
Absolutism, I guess, would be the, even the kind of theocratic absolutism, would
be their flaw. The other force is the Femocrats, a militant women's liberation
group that is also an extreme. The struggle of these two groups for control of
planets all across the galaxy is called the Pink and Blue War. It's clearly a
male-female conflict, and so far every planet the two sides have approached has
ended up on one side or the other. But Pacifica is different. Spinrad's utopia
is a stable and intelligent one. The Pacificans reject both extremes and even
change the minds of a few of the combatants. We asked Spinrad about reactions to
the book. How did women, for instance, respond to the Femocratic women's livers?
The strange thing about the reaction to that book has been that a certain number
of men have reacted in a kind of male liberal guilt, male feminist kind of
reaction against that. For the most part, women have liked the book. Women have
identified with it more than men. And actually, I even got one or two good
reviews in feminist places. I think that's not quite what I expected, but that
seems to be the way it happened. I have not gotten heavy feminist flack from
that. A little bit, but not much. Not much, because I think women who are
involved in feminism, or have been, or know women who are, can recognize a
certain aspect of the feminist movement in the Femocrats. Whereas men who are
trying to show how liberated they are would not dream of admitting such a thing.
A World Between. A different sort of book for Norman Spinrad. And we'll have
more on him tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews. And Daryl Lane. Norman Spinrad's most recent novel, Songs
from the Stars, was published by Simon & Schuster in 1980. The book describes a
fragmented future society in a world devastated by nuclear war. This, of course,
is a typical Spinrad theme. But the novel also communicates the sense of wonder
characteristic of good science fiction when it describes the marvels of contact
with an alien civilization. Society is split in two factions in Songs from the
Stars. One faction is an Aquarian society which bans all technology, in fact
anything having to do with science, since this was what was responsible for
almost destroying the Earth. And the other faction are the black scientists who
keep technology alive and maintain an illicit smuggling operation with the
Aquarian society. Spinrad talks about these opposed factions. It's a book
against duality. I mean, you have two fragmented societies. They're both...
Both are kind of like half-societies. So the Aquarian society there is a very
nice thing that works, except it really only works because it accepts something
from the black scientists, which it doesn't want to admit that it's accepted.
And the black scientists are, again, another kind of absolutism, which
doesn't...
So it's a kind of a... It's a book about higher unity, I guess. As usual, with
Spinrad, the book's conflict reflects current social conditions. And then, you
know, it mirrors the present thing in our society, where on the one hand you
have a great big space movement and people wanting to get into space and all the
old people and all that stuff. On the other hand, you have a real atavistic neo
-Luddite movement, an anti-nuclear movement, which is really kind of willfully
ignorant of a lot of things. In a way, these are the two things that could bring
about the crash.
And... As well as what would survive it. So I think it's basically a book
about... The grand philosophical attempt of that book is to try and bridge the
gap between science and reason and, you know, feeling, emotion, and mysticism.
And to... You know, to point to a higher unity between the two things and away
from the false dichotomies and false dualisms, would seem to be really
destroying Western civilization. That's a long statement. The protagonist in the
book is a laid-back Aquarian, Clear Blue Lou. Along with his girl and a
scientist, he travels up to a satellite circling the Earth. There, the three of
them receive communication from some incredibly advanced alien civilizations in
another part of the galaxy. With the knowledge sent by the helpful aliens, it
seems that humans will solve their own problems, unite, and start progressing
toward the stars once more. We asked Spinrad that if and when we contact an
alien civilization, is it likely they will be helpful rather than hostile? As I
said in the book, I do believe that any civilization that's going to last a
million years, it's going to be a million years or whatever, or even a hundred
thousand years more advanced than us, that have been around that much longer,
that much more advanced science. If it's going to survive to that length of its
own history, it's got to solve it, you know, it's got to be, by that time,
philosophically and emotionally pretty together or long since it destroyed
itself. I mean, we certainly will not survive a million years of our own history
if it continues as it has, you know. In order that any civilization that
survives a million years of its own history has had to have gotten its
political, psychological, and philosophical act together. And I don't see why,
you know. Yeah, and I do believe that if and when we run into that kind of
really advanced civilizations, that they will, if not be directly actively
helpful, certainly will be benign and will not be interested in either eating us
or conquering our planet or blowing us up or anything like that. Songs from the
Stars is a thoughtfully written book with a theme, but it's also good, exciting
science fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane. James P. Hogan's latest novel, Voyage from
Yesteryear, is a fascinating blend of computers, space exploration, and genetic
engineering. It's about a robot probe that discovers a habitable planet ten
light years from Earth, but it's different than the usual probe imagined by
science fiction authors. Right. This one is equipped to manufacture human
beings. Hogan explains. We read a lot of stories about starships that go on long
voyages that take maybe centuries, and inevitably they've got frozen bodies or
bodies in suspended animation or something like that. But when you think about
it, it seems rather an inefficient way to send, you know, if they're not doing
anything, the machines can fly the ship, the computers can get it there. The
people aren't doing anything about it except, you know, just lying there
freezing. So, you know, why not let the machines fly the ship and make the
people when you get there? If we look at the progress made in molecular biology
and genetic engineering in the last couple of decades, we already manufacture
quite complex organic molecules to specifications, such as drugs and certain
anesthetics. If we just extrapolate that a little further, who's to say you
couldn't make a complete set of human DNA? In other words, instead of sending
bodies and all the support equipment to freeze them and taking up all the space,
why not just store
all the genetic information necessary to make people electronically in the
computers and create them when you have found a planet that the instruments say
they could survive on? So the computers make a race of humans, raise them, and
place them on the planet. It sounds a bit mechanical, a little inhuman perhaps,
but Hogan thinks it could work out beautifully. So here is the interesting
possibility of a race that evolves from a first generation of embryos that were
created and nurtured and raised by computers and robots, a machine-raised race.
And when you think about it, the relationship between the children and the
machines does not really have to be a cold and sinister one at all. It could be
quite a charming and amusing one. The interesting thoughts that the book starts
to play with is, here is a race of kids that are being raised by some
very rational, direct, down-to-earth entities who don't double-talk or deceive
or have all these layers of human game-playing that we have to contend with. And
they're being raised completely without
any exposure to the conditioning of conditioned adults with their prejudices and
hatreds and taboos and a lot of the other nonsenses that make life so
complicated in our society. As you might expect, these machine-raised humans are
eventually contacted by humans from Earth. Let's imagine that a mission from
Earth eventually shows up.
Virtually, you know, a big mission. This is usually a 20-year voyage, maybe. So
we're talking about a spaceship that maybe houses 20,000 people, virtually a
space colony with engines, with its government, its military, its church
organizations, its commercial institutions. The whole of society in miniature
with its time-proved mechanisms for controlling and subordinating a population.
Which traditionally, a ruling elite through history has imposed itself by
restricting the flow of wealth and by offering protection either from real or
imagined threats. And so what happens when a race of machine-raised people
eventually collides with a race of people-raised people? And that's really what
the story's all about. The Voyage from Yesteryear will be out in paperback at
the end of July. Next week we'll have a series of shows on the works of James B.
Hogan.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.